When designing instructional material we want to take into account how instructions can be the most efficient, and how the learner uses their mental resources when learning new material.

Cognitive Load Theory

Cognitive Load Theory (CLT) investigates the architecture of information and the cognitive processes of memory and automation, with the goal of spending the learners limited cognitive resources efficiently in instructional design.
It distinguishes between working memory and long-term memory. Working memory being the immediate conscious processing of information, which on its own is very limited being only able to handle a few elements at once. It’s the interplay between long-term memory and working memory that makes the human brain able to handle the complex tasks we do everyday.
An architecture for information is required for this interplay; breaking information into elements and assembling multiple elements into a single element, called schema.  Schemas can, once stored in wlong-term memory and automated, reduce the cognitive load since each element does not need to be processed individually in working memory. We want to make a distinction between schemas, as “a cognitive structure for representing and retrieving classes of typical situations for which a similar response is required of the learner” \cite{gobet2012chunking}, and chunks as a unit of information made from smaller pieces of the same kind \cite{gobet2015chunks}.

We want make this distinction going up to the section of the rapport concerning Musical Practice, as chunking is a strategy used in practicing music \cite{ozsever2014cognitive}.

Paas et al \cite{paas2003cognitive}proposes that the interactivity between the different elements of information is of great importance of the amount of cognitive load the learner must deal with. An example of this would be that of a car. The buttons that control the windows will not put great strain on the learner to understand due to the low interactivity, while the engine, due to being elements with high interactivity, will require much more of the learner.
What makes a car mechanic able to work on car engines is that the elements of the car engine, is stored in the long-term memory. Paas et al also points out that since elements of low interactivity puts a small cognitive load, designs with CLT in mind is the most efficient when dealing with elements of high interactivity.

CLT deals with 3 types of cognitive load, all of which adds to the combined cognitive load. Since the resources available are limited, it’s therefore of great importance the type of load imposed. The following overview of the different types are based on an article by Paas et al \cite{paas2003cognitive}

The first being the intrinsic cognitive load. It’s called intrinsic, as the elements of information is defined by the complexity of the material itself, and cannot be altered without diminishing the  overall understanding. A simple mathematical problem will cause a low intrinsic cognitive load, while a more complex mathematical equation will cause high intrinsic load.The way to handle a high intrinsic cognitive load, is by omission. By focusing on a single or few elements separately, other elements can later be reintroduced giving the overall understanding. \cite{pardue2018improving}

Extraneous cognitive load is the irrelevant or unnecessary information that does not contribute or actively hinders the understanding of elements of information.

Instructional material that does not take cognitive load theory into consideration has the risk of not using the learners cognitive load efficiently, and therefore interferes with learning.

An example of this when the learner need to cross-reference material across time or space, causing extraneous cognitive load on the learners working memory. Owens and Sweller \cite{owens2008cognitive}have done experiments into this in the context of learning theoretical musical notation, and the results make them call for the consideration of CLT in any domain, including music.

Germane cognitive load deals with active understanding and storing of elements and schemas. It can be affected by the way the instructional material is designed, how the information presented, the activities involved, but it’s also affected the learners motivation and effort.


Kalyunga et al \cite{kalyuga2009expertise} identifies a potential issue when working with CLT with learners that already possesses the schemas that the instructional material is supposed to make the learner acquire. This is due to the fact that even if the learner recognises the material to be redundant, the learner is likely to try to relate acquired schemas with the presented material, causing unnecessary cognitive load. Several studies has shown this effect, called Expertise Reversal Effect \cite{yeung1998cognitive} \cite{mcnamara1996good}.

This effect will be important for us to be aware of when considering target-group, and if the design can take already acquired information into consideration.

Van Merriënboer, Kirschner, and Kester, proposed different ways instructional design can take CLT into consideration \cite{van2003taking}. One of these are Scaffolds, the initial support that helps the learner achieve a goal, but then gradually fades until the support is no longer needed. They emphasize the need for this integrated-support as it decreases the extraneous cognitive load, as they believe it may explain the finding that learners needing support is the least likely to use non-integrated support, such as manuals \cite{carroll1987paradox}. This is important to have in mind, if we want to lower the bar for playing an instrument and make practice more efficient.

Another of the approaches mentioned is Simple-to-Complex Sequencing. The approach is to break up complex tasks into simpler tasks that gradually can be combined, similar to that of chunking in musical practice.

In the paper they also discuss that of just-in-time information presentation, being the timing of when task-specific information is presented. They make the distinction between \textit{supportive information} and \textit{procedural information}.

They argue that supportive information is best used with information of a high intrinsic load,  to present the information at the beginning, as it gives the learner the framework for the information which later can be elaborated on. If the intrinsic load is low, they argue it may be better to present the information when it’s needed in the specific task, that being procedural information.
